US STEM Foundation President Doug Donegan Discusses Local Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math Initiatives

WashingtonExec interviewed US STEM Foundation President, Doug Donegan,
about the organization’s mission and how companies and employees alike
can support Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)
initiatives.  Doug talks about the importance of creating opportunities
for students to participate in hands-on experiential learning activities
that challenge their intellect and enhance their ability to creatively
collaborate.


WashintonExec: What motivated the creation of the US STEM Foundation?

Doug Donegan: Four years ago a group of parents, teachers and business
leaders who sought to give students more opportunities to participate in
hands-on technology-based activities formed the US STEM Foundation in
Haymarket, Virginia.  Battlefield High School had a growing robotics
program there that was drawing students to STEM activities at an
impressive rate.  Not only did the students respond well to the robotics
activities and the inherent technical lessons, they were learning some
significant life lessons about collaboration and responsibility.  What
started as a club became and team and evolved into a culture of
excellence fueled by the students’ enthusiasm for the activities and
challenges.  At the time I was a corporate sponsor and from the
sidelines found the whole experience to be motivating and inspiring. 
Personally, I was jealous of the opportunities that these students had,
but at the same time I was thrilled by their level of engagement and the
way the students grew personally and academically.

It was clear that these robotics activities were changing the trajectory
of the students.  However, we could also see that the enthusiasm and
attraction was going to quickly outpace the resources.  We also
recognized that this was not a unique experience, other communities were
going to be experiencing the same predicament and were going to need
help.  Extracurricular STEM programs are resource intensive.  They
require investment in special material sets, tools and infrastructure. 
Just as important are the personal investments needed; these programs
require mentors and advisors to assist the students and foster their
development.  When it comes to larger group activities, volunteers are
needed to coordinate events and make sure they run smoothly and safely. 
None of these activities or events could happen without donors whose
generosity helps subsidize the costs of facilities, infrastructure and
materials.

The US STEM Foundation was formed to address these needs. Fundamentally,
we understood that STEM activities needed a hybrid support structure
that combines the best elements of the sports league and band booster
models.  Much like a football or soccer team, extracurricular STEM
activities requires coaches with knowledge of the activity, special
equipment, and space to practice and play games.  And like a band
booster club, STEM activities need to come together to raise money for
instruments, practice sessions and travel.  Bringing together these
models, the US STEM Foundation has defined its mission to coordinate and
subsidize activities that inspire the next generation of STEM
professionals leveraging programs hands-on activities, services and
strategies that will engage, educate, develop and create responsible
citizens.


WashingtonExec: STEM topics in general are getting significant attention
in education and business.  What is driving the focus being placed upon
STEM education? 

Doug Donegan:  The focus on STEM is both economic and
strategic.  Several studies and articles have been published about the
upcoming deficit of STEM professionals in the workforce.  The work that
brought STEM to the forefront is a report entitled Rising Above the
Gathering Storm, which was authored in 2007 by a joint committee from
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering
and the Institute of Medicine.   The joint committee was convened to
discuss how America could continue to prosper in the global economy of
the 21st century.  The report the committee produced became an agenda
for the American Science and Technology Committee on Engineering and
Public Policy.  The authors of the report penned detailed responses to
several questions related to the state of science and technology
education and detailed the steps necessary for “Energizing and Employing
America for a Brighter Economic Future.”  It makes several
recommendations on the actions America should take to remain prosperous
in the 21st century in terms of K-12 education, science and engineering
research, higher education and economic policy.   The study concludes
with a call to action by theorizing about “what life might be like, if
America became noncompetitive in Science and Technology”.  Alternatively, 
one of my favorite books on this subject is The U.S.
Technology Skills Gap – What Every Technology Executive Must Know to
Save America’s Future by Gary J. Beach.  Beach goes beyond defining the
issue and outlining the challenges that need to be overcome, he devotes
a significant portion of his book to the work that companies and other
organizations are doing to address the “skills gap”, which is both
insightful and inspiring. 

Fundamentally, there are several drivers to
this issue, but I want to specifically dismiss the notion that as a
nation our young people lack interest or potential to succeed in STEM
professions.  Our students are demonstrating interest in STEM curriculum
and our universities are not lacking for students pursuing technical
degrees.  However, that is not to say that the supply is keeping up with
the demand.  The two largest factors in this demand are the retirement
of baby boomer engineers and the increasing technical requirements of
newly created jobs.  The baby boomers are exiting the workforce at a
rate higher than we can backfill the technical ranks.  This has
significant impact as the more senior engineers retire there will be
less technical leaders to train the new generation.  At the other end of
the spectrum, the number of careers that demand technical proficiency is
significantly increasing as technology evolves and consumers demand more
from products and services.  The United States won’t address this
deficiency with quantity, but with dedicated focus from education
professionals and strategic investment from industry we will make best
attempts to address it with quality.  The more we can develop our future
STEM workforce, the better our chances are at retaining our relevancy as
world leaders in technology and innovation. 

The good news is that
forward-looking corporations understand this need and are making
strategic investments to subsidize the development of their future
workforce.  They recognize that an investment today will yield
tremendous benefit when their future work force arrives with more
capability.  Smart companies know you just can’t flip a switch and ask a
group of young people to collaborate and be innovative; in addition to
being introduced to technical concepts there are several personal skills
that need to be developed through experience.  So much emphasis in our
culture is put upon individual performance and competitive performance. 
As professionals we value strong performers, but we place even more
value on contributors who deliver and collaborate to make the team
stronger and more productive.  The activities the US STEM Foundation
supports are very similar to projects we take on as professionals, they
are sufficiently broad and complex such that one strong contributor
can’t make the difference.  The challenges must be tackled as a team and
draw upon the strengths and inputs from several students with a diverse
skill set.  The US STEM Foundation likes to advertise that we are
helping train your corporation’s future talent pool; improving their
technical acumen and enhancing their ability to creatively collaborate
and innovate.  


WashintonExec: Is this an educational concept here to stay or will it be
overtaken when a new theory is introduced? 

Doug Donegan: I’m not an education professional, so I can’t speak to 
what models are being developed by academics that study and develop these models.  
However, as an engineer I assert that STEM is an excellent way to address the
educational needs of this generation.  I opine that the focus on STEM is
appropriate and based on sound education theory.  Given the need to
deliver a quality STEM workforce to the market, I don’t think we can
afford to divert our focus on STEM, but we should always try to improve
upon it and extend it. 

In the 1990s the National Science Foundation married Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Math with the acronym STEM.  Judith A. Ramaley, the former 
director of the National Science Foundation’s Education and Human Resources 
division, is credited with coining the term.  The traditional Science and 
Mathematics subjects that we grow up with are recognized as the bookends 
and enablers for the applied subjects of Technology and Engineering.  After 
years of research educators understand that these subjects cannot and 
should not be taught in isolation.  Curriculum is being adjusted in 
attempts to integrate the subjects and implement this approach.  As 
professionals we know that they do not exist in isolation in the workforce.

The US STEM Foundation recognizes that many STEM activities don’t always fit 
well into the confines of classroom time.  We seek to assist in implementing
this concept by supporting extracurricular hands-on activities that
allow students to explore and apply these subjects.


WashintonExec: What sort of programs does the US STEM Foundation have?
Doug Donegan:  To be clear, presently the US STEM Foundation does not
have any of our own proprietary programs.  However, we sponsor,
subsidize and supplement participation in several well-established STEM
activities that have been developed by other organizations. 

We support
the largest and most successful STEM activity in the United States, the
US FIRST program.  Started by Dean Kamen and Woodie Flower US FIRST,
which stands for “For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and
Technology”, seeks to inspire students to pursue engineering and
technology pursuits via a series of robotics challenges.  These robotics
challenges give exposure to STEM concepts to a broad range of students
from elementary to high school.  At the youngest levels there are
activities that employ the Lego Mindstorm® robotics kit.  At the most
senior levels there is a complex challenge that engages students to
build robots that engage in a timed, strategic game where teams
cooperate and compete simultaneously.  Personally, I think that the
FIRST challenges are some of the most ingenious activities ever devised.
  For the last three years the US STEM Foundation has sponsored an
offseason robotics competition based on the FIRST robotics challenge. 
This year’s completion saw over 400 students from 23 schools across four
states and the District of Columbia participating.  Similarly, the US
STEM Foundation coordinated volunteers and organizers for two official
FIRST competitions aimed at elementary, middle and early high school
students.  We count our reach in the thousands this year and are pleased
to be able to support these efforts. The US STEM Foundation also
sponsors several teams that compete in these competitions.  One of the
teams we sponsor, the iLite Robotics Team from Battlefield High School
(Team 1885), won the prestigious Chairman’s Award at last month’s DC
Regional Competition and as will get the opportunity to compete again at
the National Championships in St Louis.  This is analogous to the
University of Maryland winning the ACC Conference Championship and
getting a high seed in NCAA Basketball Tournament.  I want to underscore
what a tremendous achievement this is.  I’m not sure any of the local
news outlets picked up the story, but this is to be celebrated with the
same level of enthusiasm as we give our sports teams.  When it does,
I’ll know we are making significant progress in succeeding our mission.

The US STEM Foundation also supports SeaPerch, an underwater robotics
program sponsored by the Office of Naval Research and the Association
for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI).  This competition
features remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) completing complex missions
underwater.  We sponsor teams by helping them procure parts kits and
provide training for mentors and students.   This summer we will be
subsidizing a summer camp where students will have the opportunity to
learn how to assemble and operate their own SeaPerch ROVs.  Again, this
is a program that introduces students to STEM concepts and gives them
hands-on experience in tackling complex problems with the twist of
introducing an undersea dynamic.   The SeaPerch program is extremely
affordable.  We like this activity because it has a low cost barrier to
entry for organizations; schools, clubs, Boy and Girl Scout troops can
easily participate. 

We also sponsored several teams who participated in
Cyber Patriot, a national high school cyber defense competition created
by the Air Force Association and presented by the Northrop Grumman
Foundation.   This is an excellent example of two organizations
addressing a current and persistent threat by strategically investing in
our youth.  We applaud these organizations for devising and deploying
the Cyber Patriot challenge.  In my opinion it is the most immediately
applicable STEM activity.  Cyber security is extremely complex and will
only become more complicated as a function of time.  By introducing
students to these concepts early and preparing them with hands-on,
real-world practice, the Air Force Association and the Northrop Grumman
Foundation are ensuring all of us in industry will benefit. All of these
programs are resource intensive in terms of cost and volunteer support. 

The US STEM Foundation not only helps offset the cost of these
activities by subsidizing team expenses, but we also help recruit and
coordinate the vast army of volunteers and mentors required to undertake
these activities.  Just as it takes dedicated adults to run Little
League Baseball or a 4-H Camp, we aim to support the funding of these
STEM activities.


WashintonExec: How have students responded to the US STEM Foundation’s
initiatives?

Doug Donegan: At the risk of sounding undisciplined in our strategy, we
are responding to the initiative that the students show interest.  Of
course, there is a preference for the sort of activities that I’ve
already mentioned, but we recognize that good ideas and opportunities
are not limited to the things we have supported in the past.  With that
said, the students that we work with at the high school level are very
excited by FIRST Robotics.  There is a great culture there and the
spirit of Gracious Professionalism® that US FIRST inculcates is
something that genuinely seems to resonate with this generation.

US STEM is especially interested is supporting programs that are focused
at the elementary school level, where modest investments can yield
significant long term rewards.  We are already seeing the benefit of
this as elementary school students who participated in programs we
sponsored 4 years ago are entering high school and, as freshmen, are
making significant contributions.  Some of these high school students
have become mentors for new elementary school level teams.  So it is
becoming a bit of a self-fulfilling prophecy – spark an interest in STEM
and the fire spreads nicely.

We’re also especially pleased to see how many of our alumni continue to
support the activities as mentors and volunteers.  This is the most
flattering response and the purest form of return on investment that
we’ve seen so far, young professionals with college degrees in
engineering and science returning to help at a tactical level.  It
validates and benefits our mission as the students can plainly see
future versions of themselves as independent, intelligent, employed
professionals.  You can tell it is already working, I think we have the
proper trajectory and are gaining momentum every year.  With the
continued support of our volunteers and mentors and the generosity of
our donors, we aim to help our youth achieve great things.

In terms of new initiatives, we are making preparations to take some
initial, bold steps in creating a center where organizations can
undertake STEM pursuits.  We understand that one of the largest
obstacles some groups face in participating in STEM activities is a
space to work after school hours.  One of the best forms of support we
can give is to provide a dedicated and safe place for groups to meet,
learn and innovate.  The task of securing and preparing space for these
activities is well suited for our organization.  We’d prefer to allow to
the mentors and volunteers to keep their focus on assisting and
instructing the students.  This STEM center will also be the base of
operations for an Explorers Post, a co-ed Boy Scouts of America Learning
for Life® initiative, chartered by the US STEM Foundation.  By design
this will be a student run Explorer Post, which will allow students to
investigate STEM topics using their own initiative with the support of
an adult advisory team.  We expect this offering to be received
favorably and validate our belief that STEM activities are only just
beginning to become mainstream and with sufficient infrastructure will
grow even stronger.

What is the airspeed velocity of a flying European robin?


